Conflict Resolution

This document is electronically controlled. Printed copies are considered uncontrolled. 


Purpose
This policy defines a formal procedure for addressing conflict within the church. Unity within the Body of Christ is the principal aim as expressed in the Apostle’s mandate, “I urge you, brothers and sisters, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to agree together, to end your divisions, and to be united by the same mind and purpose” (1 Corinthians 1:10).


Scope
This policy guides the Elders, Staff, Leadership Board and congregation in managing conflict between disputing parties within the church fellowship. CREF regularly offers a “Peacemakers” class in an effort to educate/develop Biblical peacemaking within the congregation at large. 


Policy Statement (Details)
Unresolved conflict can fester in a church and divide congregations. A divided congregation will be less effective in its mission of Building Kingdom People through imaging Christ Jesus. The Apostle Paul understood these principles and when he saw division in the church of Corinth, he was prompted by the Holy Spirit to author the first epistle to the Corinthians. It is prudent to recognize that church congregations will sometimes have challenges that result in personal conflicts, complaints, and misunderstandings between members or staff. To ensure unity and healthy relations within the church, it is important that conflicts be addressed in a way that encourages open communication and resolution in
love. 
Matthew 18:15-17 defines a process for conflict resolution in the church. “If your brother sins against you, go and tell him his fault, between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. But if he does not listen, take one or two others along with you, that every charge may be established by the evidence of two or three witnesses, if he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church. And if he refuses to listen even to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector.”

This passage defines the procedure for addressing conflict within the church.


Definitions
This policy addresses conflicts related to personal, ethical, doctrinal, theological or ministerial practices. Situations that involve unlawful practices or harm should be referred to the appropriate authorities. For those conflicts involving psychological and emotional illness, interpersonal relationships, or family issues, the church staff, elders or Leadership Board may refer impacted parties to counseling or appropriate professional services.
A conflict can include any personal, ethical, doctrinal, theological or ministerial activity that causes a congregant serious personal or corporate concern. This policy is not meant to address the normal day-to-day disagreements we may have at a personal level with family, friends, or with other Christians. It is instead meant to address those issues or actions that are persistent and perceived to be unbiblical, sinful, and harmful to the congregant or congregation.
A congregant is any person that regularly attends Coon Rapids Evangelical Free church.


Policy Statement
It is important that congregant complaints, regardless of their perceived severity, be addressed and resolved promptly and appropriately in an effort to maintain church unity. If congregants have concerns, complaints, or misunderstandings dealing with activities within the church, the following procedures should be followed. Congregants are encouraged to utilize this policy because it has been established for the mutual benefit of all congregants and the full church community. All conflict resolution will be treated with confidentiality while operating on the premise that communication between the parties to the conflict will be open, specific and direct rather than anonymous. The airing of grievances on social media platforms is deemed inappropriate, divisive, and tantamount to gossip. Any and all such behavior will be addressed accordingly.


Conflict Resolution Procedure
A. Informal Resolution
In keeping with the spirit of the Biblical guideline of Matthew 18:15, a congregant with a conflict should go directly to the person(s) involved and clearly explain the complaint or issue, and discuss possible resolutions to the problem. In the event that the problem persists or, if for some other reason, the congregant is not satisfied with the result of the informal resolution process, the congregant may choose to move to step 1 of the formal conflict resolution process.
If informal resolution has not been attempted, the church staff, elders or Leadership Board will recommend that it be attempted first.
B. Formal Resolution
Step 1
After the congregant has made a reasonable effort to resolve the conflict informally, a formal complaint may be made to one of the elders in private. Two or three elders will then meet with the congregant to document the complaint; examine Scripture, church doctrine, and any relevant governing documents; and pray to determine the path forward to resolution or dismissal of the complaint. If deemed appropriate, the formal conflict resolution process will advance to step 2.
Step 2
If resolution or dismissal of the complaint was not achieved in step 1, in keeping with the spirit of the Biblical guideline of Matthew 18:16, a formal meeting (or meetings) will be arranged between the congregant with the complainant, the person(s) that are party to the complaint, and two or three elders. The elders will present their analysis of the situation based on prayer and the examination of Scripture, church doctrine and any relevant governing documents. During the meeting an attempt will be made to resolve the issue. If resolution can’t be reached during the meeting(s), the formal conflict resolution process will advance to step 3.
Step 3
If resolution or dismissal of the complaint was not achieved in step 2, the complaint will be reviewed by all the elders at a special meeting. The elders will pray, examine Scripture, church doctrine, and any relevant governing documents; and if necessary confer with leaders within the church to determine appropriate resolution to the conflict. A formal meeting will be arranged between the congregant with the complainant, the person(s) that are party to the complaint, the elders and the Leadership Board. The elders’ final recommendation for resolution to the conflict will be presented. If one of the parties in the conflict won’t accept the elders' recommendation and continues to cause conflict and division, the said party may be disciplined per Article I, Section 2, parts B and C of the church constitution and bylaws.
The ultimate aim of church discipline is the restoration of a Christian to unified fellowship.


Roles and Responsibilities
Role - Responsibilities

Elders/Pastors - Implementation/mediation of conflict resolution
Board - Implementation/mediation of conflict resolution
Congregation - Biblical Peacemaking in a posture of humility


Abbreviations, Acronyms and Definitions


References & Related Policies

Policy Owner CREF Leadership Board
Policy Author CREF Leadership Board


Appendices 